---
title: What's New in pyribs 0.4.0
description:
  We discuss the wide range of features and improvements in pyribs 0.4.0.
author: Bryon Tjanaka
author_url: https://btjanaka.net
date: 2021-07-19t12:00:00-08:00
tags: releases
---

pyribs 0.4.0 introduces many new features, in particular in the archives. This
post highlights some of the features and how to take advantage of them. For the
full changelog, refer to the
[GitHub release](https://github.com/icaros-usc/pyribs/releases/tag/v0.4.0).

**Several changes are backwards-incompatible; these are listed at the beginning
of their respective section.**

<p class="font-light text-2xl" style="margin-bottom: 0 !important;">Overview</p>

<div class="mt-2">

[[toc]]

</div>

<style>
nav.l-body li, nav.l-body ul {
  margin-top: 0;
  margin-bottom: 0;
}
</style>

## Installation

pyribs 0.4.0 supports Python 3.6-3.9. To install on pip, run:

```bash
pip install ribs[all]==0.4.0
```

And on Conda:

```bash
conda install pyribs=0.4.0
```

Instructions may differ depending on what distribution you installed previously.
Refer to the [Installation Selector](https://pyribs.org/#installation) for more
details.

## Archives

### **Backwards-Incompatible:** Rename `index` to `index_0` in `CVTArchive.as_pandas`

In previous versions,
[CVTArchive.as_pandas()](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.CVTArchive.html#ribs.archives.CVTArchive.as_pandas)
returned a DataFrame with a column named `index`, since indices in the
`CVTArchive` are only integers. For consistency with other archives, we have
renamed this column to `index_0`.

### **Backwards-Incompatible:** `get_index()` now public

_If you have not built your own archive, this change likely does not affect
you._

To emphasize the meaning of the index in each archive, we have made
[get_index()](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.ArchiveBase.html#ribs.archives.ArchiveBase.get_index)
public for all archives. Previously, this was a "protected" method known as
`_get_index()`.

### **Backwards-Incompatible:** `get_random_elite()` and `elite_with_behavior()` return `Elite`

Instead of a tuple of `sol, obj, beh`, `get_random_elite()` and
`elite_with_behavior()` now return an
[Elite](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.Elite.html)
namedtuple. `Elite` contains `sol, obj, beh, idx, meta`, where `idx` is the
index of the elite in the archive and `meta` is the metadata of the elite (more
on that below). Furthermore, since `Elite` is a namedtuple, we recommend that
new code use the following:

```python
elite = archive.get_random_elite()  # Or elite_with_behavior()
elite.sol
elite.obj
elite.beh
elite.idx
elite.meta
```

Instead of:

```python
sol, obj, beh = archive.get_random_elite()
```

### Metadata in archives

In some cases, elites in an archive have arbitrary objects associated with them,
such as generated images or dictionaries with extra statistics. With the
introduction of metadata in pyribs, these objects can be easily stored with the
elites. By default, elites store `None` as their metadata, but users may pass a
list of metadata objects when calling `tell()` on emitters and optimizers. For
instance, the following will associate the dict `{"a": 1}` with the first
solution, `None` with the second solution, and the tuple `(7, 8, 9)` with the
third solution:

```python
optimizer.tell(
  [1.0, 2.0, 3.0],  # Objectives
  [[1.0, 1.0], [2.0, 2.0], [3.0, 3.0]],  # 2D BCs
  [{"a": 1}, None, (7, 8, 9)],  # Metadata
)
```

As mentioned above, the
[Elite](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.Elite.html)
namedtuple contains `meta` for accessing metadata when retrieving an elite.

Furthermore,
[as_pandas()](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.ArchiveBase.html#ribs.archives.ArchiveBase.as_pandas)
includes an `include_metadata` parameter, which adds a DataFrame column with the
metadata of each elite. By default, this option is False so that the DataFrame
can still be saved to a CSV.

### Archive Statistics

We have added the `archive.stats` attribute, which is an
[ArchiveStats](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.ArchiveStats.html)
namedtuple with useful statistics about the archive:

```python
# Number of elites in the archive.
archive.stats.num_elites

# Proportion of bins in the archive that have an elite - always in the range
# [0,1].
archive.stats.coverage

# QD score, i.e. sum of objective values of all elites in the archive. This
# score only makes sense if objective values are non-negative.
archive.stats.qd_score

# Maximum objective value of the elites in the archive. None if there are no
# elites in the archive.
archive.stats.obj_max

# Mean objective value of the elites in the archive. None if there are no elites
# in the archive.
archive.stats.obj_mean
```

### `ArchiveDataFrame` for `as_pandas()`

Since `as_pandas()` splits arrays into individual components (e.g. `solution_0`,
`solution_1` and `behavior_0`, `behavior_1`), it was difficult to manipulate
elites in a DataFrame. For instance, it was hard to access each solution vector
when iterating over the rows of the DataFrame. It was also inconvenient to
access the elite data in batch, e.g. "give me all the behavior values of the
elites in this DataFrame." To remedy this, `as_pandas()` now returns an
[ArchiveDataFrame](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.ArchiveDataFrame.html).

[ArchiveDataFrame](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.ArchiveDataFrame.html)
adds several features to DataFrame's which make it easier to manipulate elites.
First, calling `iterelites()` on an ArchiveDataFrame returns an iterator which
converts every row to an
[Elite](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.Elite.html)
namedtuple.

```python
df = archive.as_pandas()
for elite in df.iterelites():
    elite.sol
    elite.obj
    ...
```

Second, `batch_X` attributes return the `X` of all elites in the
ArchiveDataFrame. The attributes currently available are:

```python
batch_behaviors   # Array with behavior values of all elites.
batch_indices     # List of archive indices of all elites.
batch_metadata    # Array with metadata of all elites.
batch_objectives  # Array with objective values of all elites.
batch_solutions   # Array with solutions of all elites.
```

Importantly, since ArchiveDataFrame is still a DataFrame, all other Pandas
features still work.

### `clear()` method

[archive.clear()](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.ArchiveBase.html#ribs.archives.ArchiveBase.clear)
removes all elites from an archive.

### `__len__`

`len(archive)` now returns the number of elites in the archive.

### `__iter__`

Iterating over an archive now yields every
[Elite](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.archives.Elite.html)
contained in it. Importantly, for loops now work:

```python
for elite in archive:
    elite.sol
    elite.obj
    ...
```

## Visualization

### `parallel_axes_plot` for archives

_Thanks to [Nathan Dennler](https://ndennler.github.io/) for contributing this
feature!_

We have added
[parallel_axes_plot](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.visualize.parallel_axes_plot.html#ribs.visualize.parallel_axes_plot)
for visualizing the elites of _any archive_ in behavior space. In the parallel
axes plot, each elite's behavior values are displayed as a series of line
segments connecting each value to the next. For instance, in the plot below, an
elite with behavior values `[0,5, 0.0, -0.5, 1.0, 0.0]` would be shown with a
line segment from `behavior_0 = 0.5` to `behavior_1 = 0.0`, a line segment from
`behavior_1 = 0.0` to `behavior_2 = -0.5`, and so on. This plot can help with
understanding the behavior space coverage of an archive, as well as the
correlations between BCs (e.g. "is `behavior_0` correlated to `behavior_1`?").

![Example parallel axes plot for an archive with a 5D behavior space.
[Source](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.visualize.parallel_axes_plot.html)]({{ "/imgs/parallel-axes-plot.png" | url }})

## Optimizers

### Support for emitters which return any number of solutions in `ask()`

Previously, all emitters for an optimizer had to return the same number of
solutions in their `ask()` method. Now, they may return any number of solutions
-- the number may even change across iterations.

### Support arbitrary kwargs for emitters

By using the `emitter_kwargs` parameters in
[ask()](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.optimizers.Optimizer.html#ribs.optimizers.Optimizer.ask)
and
[tell()](https://docs.pyribs.org/en/stable/api/ribs.optimizers.Optimizer.html#ribs.optimizers.Optimizer.tell),
arbitrary kwargs may now be passed to emitters. `emitter_kwargs` may be a single
dict which is passed to all emitters:

```python
optimizer.ask(emitter_kwargs={"a": 1, "b": 2})  # Passes a=1, b=2 to all emitters.
```

Or it may be a list of dicts, where each dict is passed to each emitter (the
order is determined by the list of emitters passed in to the optimizer during
construction):

```python
# Passes a=1, b=2 to the first emitter, and c=3, d=4 to the second emitter.
optimizer.ask(emitter_kwargs=[{"a": 1, "b": 2}, {"c": 3, "d": 4}])
```

## Emitters

### **Backwards-Incompatible:** `EmitterBase` simplifications

_If you have not built your own emitter, this change likely does not affect
you._

As the `_rng` and `_batch_size` / `batch_size` attributes are not required on
all emitters, we have moved them out of `EmitterBase` and into children
emitters. Since `_rng` is no longer in `EmitterBase`, we have also removed the
`seed` parameter. Finally, we added an `archive` attribute (replacing the older
`_archive`), which allows accessing the emitter's archive.
